# FAIRmaterials

## What is FAIRmaterials and what does it do?

'FAIRmaterials' is a bilingual package in R and Python that translates several CSV files from the template (described below) with ontological terms and corresponding data into RDF triples. These RDF triples are then stored in OWL and JSON-LD files, facilitating data accessibility, interoperability, and knowledge unification. The triples are also visualized in a graph saved as an SVG or as a PNG with the Python package. The Python package has a fourth output too. It generates documentation for the output ontology as an HTML.

Put the sheets, created from the template (described below), for one or more ontologies in a folder and the 'FAIRmaterials' 'process_ontology_files' or 'FAIRSheetParser' function will output a JSON-LD, turtle/OWL, SVG/PNG visualization, and HTML documentation into the input folder for all the input ontologies merged. Note that a folder containing only files for one ontology will give results for just that ontology and specifying a base uri is required for merging ontologies. The package can handle subdirectories by producing separate unmerged outputs for each subdirectory and a merged output from all files in the input path. This tool, developed for use by the SDLE Research Center at Case Western Reserve University, facilitates the creation and visualization of material science ontologies.

## How to use the FAIR CSV template

To prepare your CSV file, ensure your CSV file contains the appropriate ontological terms and corresponding data using this template: [FAIR CSV Template](https://github.com/cwru-sdle/FAIRmaterials/tree/main/FAIRSheetTemplates)

The template has documention on its use. The descriptions under the column names provide instructions for how to fill out each column. Once the Name Space, Value Type Definitions, Relationship Definitions, Variable Definitions, and Ontology Info sheets are filled out, 'FAIRmaterials' is ready to use. The visualizations generated by this package are helpful to visualize an ontology to ensure satisfaction with the information in the sheets.

## Statement of need

`Protege` is currently the most widely-used open-source tool for ontology creation and development.
Its main capabilities include manually creating and editing ontological terms and relationships, visualizing ontologies, checking the logical consistency of ontologies, and querying ontologies for specific information.
Unfortunately, the complexity of the interface is a barrier for those who have little experience with ontology creation.
This complexity prevents many researchers from creating and integrating ontologies with their own datasets entirely.
Therefore, there is a need for a tool that can create ontologies with an interface that is easily understandable and provides ample documentation on how to use it.
`FAIRmaterials` seeks to lower the barrier of entry for scientists entering the world of ontology development and evolution.
The package provides a baseline CSV ontology template with built-in and easy-to-follow instructions on how to design an ontology which can be found [here](https://github.com/cwru-sdle/FAIRmaterials/tree/main/FAIRSheetTemplates). 
Preliminary applications of the package in additive manufacturing [@FAIRcite1] and PV systems [@Nihar2021] suggest that `FAIRmaterials` offers valuable capabilities for researchers.

## Community Guideline

We welcome your ideas! If you find a bug, have an idea for a new feature, or see something that could be improved, please open an issue.
Your suggestions help us make this project better for everyone. The GitHub page is only for public-facing purpose.