# FAIRmaterials

## What is FAIRmaterials and what does it do?

'FAIRmaterials' translates several CSV files from the template (described below) with ontological terms and corresponding data into RDF triples. These RDF triples are then stored in OWL and JSON-LD files, facilitating data accessibility, interoperability, and knowledge unification. The triples are also visualized in a graph saved as an SVG. This package reads, processes, and combines ontology CSV files from a specified folder. The package can handle subdirectories by producing separate unmerged outputs for each subdirectory and a merged output from all files in the input path. This tool, developed for use by the SDLE Research Center at Case Western Reserve University, facilitates the creation and visualization of material science ontologies.

## How to use FAIR CSV template 
To Prepare your CSV file, ensure your CSV file contains the appropriate ontological terms and corresponding data using this template: [FAIR CSV Template][1] [^1] 

[1]: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k7gFRc1Yslc-m65aWfFCxqk5UtrKZl9c3GyEFQvLSFU/edit?usp=drive_link "FAIR CSV Template"

In the template the descriptions under the column names provide instructions for how to fill out each column. Once the Name Space, Value Type Definitions, Relationship Definitions, Variable Definitions, and Ontology Info sheets are filled out, 'FAIRmaterials' is ready to use. The visualizations generated by this package are helpful to visualize an ontology to ensure satisfaction with the information in the sheets.

## Usage
Put the sheets, created from the above template, for one or more ontologies in a folder and the 'FAIRmaterials' 'process_ontology_files' function will output a jsonld, turtle/owl, and svg visualization into the input folder for all the input ontologies merged. Note that a folder containing only files for one ontology will give results for just that ontology and specifying a base uri is required for merging ontologies.

## License

This work is legally bound by the following software license: [BSD-3-Clause][2] [^2]  
Please see the LICENSE.txt file, in the root of this repository, for further details.

[2]: https://cran.r-project.org/web/licenses/BSD_3_clause "BSD-3-Clause"


[^1]: [FAIR CSV Template](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1k7gFRc1Yslc-m65aWfFCxqk5UtrKZl9c3GyEFQvLSFU/edit?usp=sharing)
[^2]: [BSD-3-Clause](https://cran.r-project.org/web/licenses/BSD_3_clause)

## Acknowledgment

This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE) under Solar Energy Technologies Office (SETO) Agreement Numbers DE-EE0009353 and DE-EE0009347, Department of Energy (National Nuclear Security Administration) under Award Number DE-NA0004104 and Contract number B647887, and U.S. National Science Foundation Award under Award Number 2133576.

| Authors: 
|     Jonathan E. Gordon$^{1}$, Alexander Harding Bradley$^{1}$, Priyan Rajamohan$^{1}$, Nathaniel Hahn$^{1}$, Kiefer Lin$^{1}$, 
|     Arafath Nihar$^{1}$, Hayden Cadwell$^{1}$, Jiana Kambo$^{1}$, Jayvic Jimenez$^{1}$, Kristen J. Hernandez$^{1}$, Hein Htet Aung$^{1}$, 
|     Brian Giera$^{2}$, Weiqi Yu$^{1}$, Mohommad Redad Mehdi$^{1}$, Finley Holt$^{1}$, Quynh Tran$^{1}$, Gabriel Ponon$^{1}$, 
|     Dan Savage$^{3}$, Don Brown$^{3}$, Jarod Kaltenbaugh$^{4}$, Kush Havinal$^{4}$, Nicholas Gray$^{4}$, Max Ligget$^{1}$,
|     Benjamin G. Pierce$^{1}$, Raymond Wieser$^{1}$, Yangxin Fan$^{1}$, Tommy Ciardi$^{1}$, Olatunde J. Akanbi$^{1}$, Hadiza Iawal$^{1}$,
|     Will Oltjen$^{1}$, Maliesha Kalutotage$^{1}$, Antony Lino$^{1}$, Van Tran$^{1}$, Mingjian Lu$^{1}$, Xuanji Yu$^{1}$,
|     Abhishek Daundkar$^{1}$, Hope Omodolor$^{1}$, Mirra Rasmussen$^{1}$, Sameera Nalin-Venkat$^{1}$, Tian Wang$^{1}$,
|     Rounak Chawla$^{1}$, Liangyi Huang$^{1}$, Zelin Li$^{1}$, Leean Jo$^{1}$, Jeffrey M. Yarus$^{1}$, Mengjie Li$^{4}$,
|     Kristopher O. Davis$^{4}$,  Yinghui Wu$^{1}$, Pawan K. Tripathi$^{1}$, Laura S. Bruckman$^{1}$, Erika I. Barcelos$^{1}$, 
|     Roger H. French$^{1}$
|
| $^{1}$ Materials Data Science for Stockpile Stewardship Center of Excellence, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
| $^{2}$ Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA 94551, USA
| $^{3}$ Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA
| $^{4}$ University of Central Florida, Materials Science & Engineering, Orlando, FL 32816, USA
